JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
SALLY YATES, Former Acting U.S.
Attorney General:
You don't want your national
security adviser
compromised with the Russians.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Former acting
Attorney General
Sally Yates tells the Senate how
she warned
the White House that General
Michael Flynn
was at risk of being blackmailed
by Moscow.
Then: France's new leader,
centrist Emmanuel
Macron, wins a closely watched
presidential
election by a landslide over
far-right candidate
Marine Le Pen.
Plus: more legal challenges for
President
Trump's travel ban.
A federal appeals court in
Virginia hears
arguments on the revised
executive order.
And bringing the doctor's office
to the kitchen
-- how health care professionals
are focusing
on their patient's diet to
prevent diseases
on the rise.
DR.
NICOLE FARMER, Primary Care
Physician: If
I teach you how to cook, you're
going to improve
the types of food that you eat
and then ultimately
that is what is going to prevent
chronic disease
for you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the U.S.
Senate, the attention
today was on the investigation
into the Trump
administration's relationship
with Russia,
as senators heard from a man who
has been
in the spotlight for years and a
woman few
had heard of before last fall.
Lisa Desjardins reports.
LISA DESJARDINS: At the Capitol,
a swarm of
attention at a Russia hearing
with two high-profile
witnesses.
One was former Director of
National Intelligence
James Clapper.
But attention focused on the
other, former
acting Attorney General Sally
Yates, who first
warned the White House that then
National
Security Adviser Michael Flynn
had lied about
his talks with Russian
officials.
SALLY YATES, Former Acting U.S.
Attorney General:
The concern first about the
underlying conduct
itself, that he had lied to the
vice president
and others, the American public
had been misled,
and then, importantly, that
every time this
lie was repeated, and the
misrepresentations
were getting more and more
specific as they
were coming out, every time that
happened,
it increased the compromise.
And to state the obvious, you
don't want your
national security adviser
compromised with
the Russians.
LISA DESJARDINS: Yates said she
made no recommendations,
just relayed information.
SALLY YATES: That created a
compromise situation,
a situation where the national
security adviser
essentially could be blackmailed
by the Russians.
Finally, we told them that we
were giving
them all of this information so
that they
could take action, the action
that they deemed
appropriate.
LISA DESJARDINS: Eighteen days
after that
private warning, the White House
forced out
Flynn.
Now, that was just four days
after the news
had become public.
White House Press Secretary Sean
Spicer said
this at the time:
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
The acting attorney general
informed the White
House counsel that they wanted
to give -- quote
-- a "heads-up" to us on some
comments that
may have seemed in conflict with
what he had
said to the vice president in
particular.
LISA DESJARDINS: Today,
Democrats pressed
the witnesses on whether the
White House did
enough fast enough.
SEN.
RICHARD DURBIN (D-IL), Minority
Whip: If you
had the warning from the White
House -- or,
pardon me -- from the Department
of Justice
to the White House about General
Flynn possibly
being compromised here, and then
these important
national security decisions that
followed,
would you have concern about
that?
JAMES CLAPPER, Former National
Intelligence
Director: Well, I would,
hypothetically, yes.
I mean, again, I was gone from
the government
as well when this happened.
LISA DESJARDINS: President Trump
added his
thoughts this morning
electronically, tweeting:
"Ask Sally Yates, under oath, if
she knows
how classified information got
into the newspapers
soon after she explained it to
the White House
counsel."
Iowa Republican Senator Chuck
Grassley asked.
SEN.
CHARLES GRASSLEY (R), Iowa: Have
either of
you ever been an anonymous
source in a news
report about matters relating to
Mr. Trump,
his associates or Russians'
attempt to meddle
in the election?
JAMES CLAPPER: No.
SALLY YATES: Absolutely not.
LISA DESJARDINS: All this comes
as news reports
surfaced today President Obama
warned Mr.
Trump against hiring Flynn just
days after
the election.
For his part, Spicer said today
those comments
were expected.
SEAN SPICER: It's true that the
president
made it -- President Obama made
it known that
he wasn't exactly a fan of
General Flynn's,
which frankly shouldn't come as
a surprise
to anyone, given that General
Flynn had worked
for President Obama, was an
outspoken critic
of President Obama's
shortcomings.
LISA DESJARDINS: This topic and
Sally Yates
will remain in the spotlight.
A House committee is due to hear
from her.
No date scheduled for that yet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Lisa is here
with me now
to dig deeper into what we
learned today.
We're also joined by Julie Pace,
who is the
White House correspondent for
the Associated
Press.
Welcome, of course, to both of
you.
Lisa, to your first just quickly
off of your
report.
A lot of accusations flying back
and forth
between the Trump White House
and the former
Obama team.
We know that one of the things
this -- President
Trump has said is that President
Obama's White
House had given a security
clearance originally
to General Flynn, who they fired
as the head
of defense intelligence a few
years ago.
Where does the truth in all that
lie?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
So, this security clearance is
something that
retired generals have access to.
They can ask for it by the fact
that they
are a retired general.
Flynn did ask for that in 2016.
He was given it by the Defense
Department.
There was reporting today that
now the Defense
Department is looking into
whether he lied
to them during that clearance
security renewal.
Take that aside, though.
When you talk to national
security experts,
some from the George W. Bush
team and Democrats,
they all told me today that a
security clearance
doesn't take the onus off an
incoming administration
to do their own vetting.
And a very important difference
about the
national security adviser, Judy,
it's not
a Senate-approved position, so
it doesn't
go through all the ethics checks
necessarily,
unless the president forces it
to.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, now,
one other thing
that you have been looking into
today is this
question of President Obama,
after President
Trump was elected, after he was
elected last
November, warning him.
What did you find out about
that?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
Others have reported this as
well, but we
have a source telling us from
the Obama White
House that, in fact, President
Obama, that
it wasn't just about Michael
Flynn being a
critic of his, but, from their
perspective,
that they Michael Flynn as
someone who was
erratic, and a bad manager and
shouldn't continue
in government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, well,
on that note,
let's pick up with Julie Pace.
Julie, you did some reporting
going into the
weekend about the Trump
transition team coming
to the Obama team during that --
during the
transition last November with
questions, and
what was the significance of all
that?
JULIE PACE, Associated Press:
Right.
I think that what this shows is
just the depths
of the concerns about Mike
Flynn.
You had people who were working
for the Trump
transition team after the
election who were
concerned that Mike Flynn, who
was going to
be having a conversation with
the Russian
ambassador -- that wasn't
unusual -- as national
security adviser, you would be
talking to
a foreign counterpart -- but
that Mike Flynn
did not really understand the
potential motivations
of Sergey Kislyak, the Russian
envoy, that
he might not understand rumored
ties that
Kislyak had to Russian
intelligence.
So, what the transition
officials were seeking
is a classified CIA biography on
the Russian
ambassador that would give U.S.
intelligence
assessments about the envoy.
And for the Obama
administration, this raised
red flags, because it showed
that within Trump's
own team, there were concerns
about Flynn's
ability to handle what's an
incredibly sensitive
and high-pressure job that
involves an enormous
amount of contact with foreign
officials,
both friendly officials and
adversaries.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Julie, you
-- to move
beyond that, you have learned a
lot more about
what the Obama team was thinking
during the
transition, how they grew
increasingly concerned
about what they were learning.
JULIE PACE: Right.
There was a growing concern
within the Obama
administration on a number of
fronts.
You had Mike Flynn, who was
going in for his
meetings with his counterparts
in the Obama
administration, and they would
talk about
Russia, and he would
essentially, I'm told,
dismiss Russia as a threat to
the United States.
That raised some concern.
You had worries about handling
of sensitive
administration, documents that
the Obama administration
was turning over to the Trump
team.
There was some concern that
those documents
were being copied and removed
from secure
rooms.
So, you saw the Obama team
limiting the amount
of information they were letting
outside the
White House.
And it really comes all at a
time when U.S.
also intelligence is starting to
gather more
information that some officials
believe shows
more ties between the Trump
campaign and Trump
associates and Russia's meddling
in the elections.
So, taken together from the
perspective of
Obama officials, this really
created a troubling
picture of the Trump team's ties
to Russia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly,
Julie, in
other words, the ending of the
Obama administration
in a pretty fraught frame of
mind over all
this?
JULIE PACE: Absolutely.
And you have seen that almost
continue, particularly
when it comes to Mike Flynn.
The revelations today, I don't
think are coincidental
that the Obama team felt the
need to get out
there that the outgoing
president was delivering
a personal warning to his
successor about
his likely choice for national
security adviser.
When you think about that,
that's quite extraordinary.
You would expect presidents to
be giving their
successors advice perhaps on
policy.
But to give a specific warning
about a potential
personnel pick really is
extraordinary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Remarkable
reporting.
Julie Pace of the AP and our own
Lisa Desjardins,
we thank you both.
And we will be discussing
Russia's meddling
with a former Justice Department
official
right after our news summary.
In the day's other news: A
federal appeals
court in Richmond, Virginia,
heard arguments
over President Trump's revised
travel ban.
It's the first time it's been
scrutinized
at the appellate level since the
ban was reworked
in March.
The judges are examining a
ruling that blocks
the administration from
suspending new visas
for people from six
Muslim-majority countries.
Meanwhile, at today's Senate
hearing in Washington,
former acting Attorney General
Sally Yates
took heat from Republicans for
refusing to
carry out the president's
original executive
order.
The move ultimately led to her
firing.
SEN.
JOHN CORNYN (R), Texas: I find
it enormously
disappointing that you would
countermand the
executive order of the president
of the United
States because you happened to
disagree with
it as a policy matter.
SALLY YATES, Former Acting U.S.
Attorney General:
I looked at this.
I made a determination that I
believed it
was unlawful.
I also thought that it was
inconsistent with
the principles of the Department
of Justice,
and I said no.
And that's what I promised you I
would do.
And that's what I did.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will have
excerpts from
today's appeals court hearing in
Richmond
later in the program.
President Trump is now working
to put his
own stamp on the nation's
federal court system.
Today, he released a slate of 10
conservative
judicial nominees.
More will be announced in the
months to come,
with more than 120 vacancies
still in need
of being filled.
All of his judicial nominees
will require
Senate confirmation.
In France, president-elect
Emmanuel Macron
appeared alongside his
predecessor a day after
a resounding victory over rival
Marine Le
Pen.
Macron and Francois Hollande
presented a united
front at a ceremony marking the
end of World
War II at the Tomb of the
Unknown Soldier
in Paris.
We will take a closer look at
that election,
and what a Macron presidency may
mean for
Europe, later in the program.
Pentagon officials have
confirmed that a military
raid last month killed the
leader of the Islamic
State's affiliate in
Afghanistan.
The joint Afghan and U.S.
operation targeted
the eastern province of
Nangarhar.
Two U.S. Army Rangers also died.
The Pentagon said that Abdul
Haseeb Logari
ordered a March attack on a
hospital in Kabul
that killed or wounded more than
100 people.
Former President Barack Obama is
urging members
of Congress to look beyond party
lines when
it comes to the future of health
care.
Mr. Obama weighed in on the
issue last night
after receiving the John F.
Kennedy Profile
in Courage Award in Boston.
It's the first time he's spoken
out since
the Republican-led House voted
Thursday to
repeal his Affordable Care Act.
BARACK OBAMA, Former President
of the United
States: It actually doesn't take
a lot of
courage to aid those who are
already powerful,
already comfortable, already
influential.
But it does require some courage
to champion
the vulnerable and the sick.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The GOP's
Obamacare replacement
faces a more uncertain fate in
the Senate,
where it's expected to undergo
major revisions.
Texas Governor Greg Abbott has
signed a law
banning so-called sanctuary city
policies
in his state.
The measure allows Texas police
officers to
question the legal status of
anyone they stop.
Sheriffs who don't comply with
federal immigration
agents could face jail time.
Abbott gave no advance notice
before signing
the bill on Facebook Live last
night.
It goes into effect September 1.
GOV.
GREG ABBOTT (R), Texas: Elected
officials
and law enforcement agencies
don't get to
pick and choose which laws they
will obey.
There are consequences, deadly
consequences,
to not enforcing the law.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Trump
administration has
threatened to withhold federal
funding from
sanctuary cities.
The country's largest TV station
operator,
Sinclair Broadcast Group, has
agreed to buy
rival Tribune Media.
The deal is valued at $3.9
billion, but is
still subject to regulatory
approval.
If approved, Sinclair would own
more than
200 stations nationwide.
And trading was light on Wall
Street today.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained five
points to close at 21012.
The Nasdaq rose nearly two
points and the
S&P 500 added a fraction of a
point.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a former
Justice Department official
weighs in on the
Russia investigation hearing; a
tough road
ahead for France's newly elected
president;
arguments for and against
President Trump's
travel ban in court; and much
more.
With us now to discuss today's
congressional
testimonies and the ongoing
investigation
into Russia's interference in
November's presidential
election is John Carlin.
He served as assistant attorney
general for
national security from 2014
until October
of last year.
He's now an attorney in private
practice specializing
in cyber-security and crisis
management.
John Carlin, welcome to the
"NewsHour."
JOHN CARLIN, Former Justice
Department Official:
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you listened
to much of
today's hearing, the senators
questioning
the former acting Attorney
General Sally Yates,
the former head of national
intelligence,
Director of National
Intelligence Mr. Clapper.
What did you mainly take away
from today?
JOHN CARLIN: Well, this one
thing I heard
was a career department official
describing
handling a situation exactly the
way we have
handled numerous other
counterintelligence
investigations.
That said, highly unusual that
the individual
who is having secret with
Russians and essentially
not telling his bosses is the
actual national
security adviser.
And you can see why we take that
type of situation
very seriously, even when it's a
much lower-ranking
official who possesses access to
our nation's
secrets.
But for the national security
adviser to secretly
be having conversations with
Russian officials,
not telling the vice president
of the United
States, I can't imagine a
situation which
would cause more alarm for the
career counterintelligence
officials.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I mean, how --
it's just a
natural question.
How unusual is a situation like
this?
JOHN CARLIN: Well, in some ways,
it's usual,
insofar as the Russians are
constantly trying
to compromise officials, even
businessmen,
in order to gain access and be
able to gain
secrets.
They think years in advance.
Think about one of the cases we
prosecuted,
the Russian illegal case.
These are people here under
nonofficial cover,
growing families inside the
United States,
to maybe be used in some later
date.
But what's incredibly unusual
here is that
it's one of the most important,
if not the
most important national security
figure in
our entire apparatus, the
national security
adviser.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, I know that
former Attorney
General Yates and I know
Director Clapper
couldn't answer -- at least they
said, in
a public setting, they couldn't
answer some
of these questions.
But how much can be said about
how much actual
proof there is that there was
collusion between
the Trump campaign and what the
Russians were
up to?
JOHN CARLIN: Well, that's not
something that
I can talk about here.
I think it's important that that
be investigated
by those trained and sworn to do
those investigations
without fear or favor in a
nonpartisan way.
And I have every trust in the
FBI agents I
worked with in -- years and
following that
where it needs to go.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You do have trust
in them?
JOHN CARLIN: I do.
I have worked with those folks
both at the
FBI when I was chief staff to
Director Mueller,
and also with them as a
prosecutor at the
Justice Department, and the
career prosecutors
there, that these are people,
they don't care
about politics.
They're going to follow the
evidence where
it leads and take it where it
needs to go.
That said, we have got to look
forward.
One reason it's important to
learn lessons
about what exactly what Russia
did in our
prior election is because we now
have heard
two more officials, along with
the current
director of the FBI and our top
-- the leader
of the National Security Agency,
say, Russia
is going to do this again in
2020, maybe as
soon as next year.
We just saw the massive hacking
attacks on
the French elections.
They're doing it now in Europe.
We have to change our policy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what does it
say that the
-- I mean, we're going back over
what they
talked about today.
But then the acting attorney
general goes
to the White House, to the
president's legal
counsel, and says, this is what
we think is
going on.
We believe that Mr. Flynn has --
General Flynn
has had these contacts with the
Russians.
We think he hasn't told the
truth to the vice
president.
And then the White House's
reaction after
a day or so is to say, you're
fired.
I mean, what does that tell you?
JOHN CARLIN: Well, I can't talk
about what
was going on in the minds of the
White House
when they got this extraordinary
briefing
that said their national
security adviser
was compromised by the Russians.
But the fact is, he was fired
several weeks
later.
JUDY WOODRUFF: After that.
And the other thing that came up
today that
I want to ask you about is the
questions from
several senators to the acting
-- Sally Yates,
then acting attorney general,
about why it
would matter that someone in the
White House,
one White House official didn't
tell the truth
to another White House official.
JOHN CARLIN: Well, you know,
they're new in
their positions.
And I guess it's good that they
asked the
questions and received the
answers from the
career law enforcement national
security officials
about why that is important, at
least when
the issue is that someone is
lying about contacts
with the Russians and what
Russians -- Russian
intelligence services have done
with that
type of information in the past
and how they
use it to compromise
individuals.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Final question.
If there were an instance
ongoing today -- and
we don't know this at all to be
the case -- of
someone in the administration
talking to the
Russians, the intelligence
community finds
out about it, tries to warn the
White House,
is it possible for the White
House to ignore
it and to say, we don't want the
hear that
information, you're fired, or is
it going
to get the attention of the
people it needs
to -- it needs to?
JOHN CARLIN: Well, we can only
hope that it
will get the attention that it
needs to.
But it is why it's important in
a nonpartisan
way, while we have senators like
Graham and
the White House working
together, Senator
Grassley, I think, asked
appropriately, both
officials today, and said, what
are the lessons
that we have learned?
Are they coming again?
They said, yes, the Russians are
coming again.
We need to harden our state
systems.
We need to have public hearings
like this
to educate the American people
on how the
Russians are using fake news
essentially to
try to influence elections.
And we need to do more to deter
them, working
with our allies to cause pain to
them to make
them rethink this tactic of
trying to undermine
democracy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Carlin,
former assistant
attorney general, we thank you
very much.
JOHN CARLIN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: France
elects a new president,
after the most closely watched
and divisive
campaign there in decades.
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant reports
from Paris.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Emmanuel Macron
left his
home in Paris this morning
absorbing the reality
that he is France's youngest
national leader
since Napoleon.
EMMANUEL MACRON, French
President-Elect (through
translator): I will serve you
with humility,
with force.
I will serve you in the name of
our motto,
liberty, equality, fraternity.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Macron overcame
Marine Le
Pen's brand of nationalist
populism and weathered
a suspected Russian hacking
attack on his
campaign that dumped reams of
internal e-mail
hours before voting began.
He will be inaugurated as
France's 25th president
on Sunday.
But even though he won 66
percent of the vote,
analysts said it could not be
regarded as
an overwhelming mandate.
Out of a possible electorate of
47 million,
only 20 million people voted for
Emmanuel
Macron.
Many of those did so tactically
just to keep
Le Pen out.
Macron could face a highly
troublesome five
years in the presidential
palace.
Analyst Pascal Boniface says the
struggles
could start early, if Macron
fails to get
a majority in the French
National Assembly.
PASCAL BONIFACE, Analyst
(through translator):
He has to create very soon a
huge movement
and to find a majority.
If there is no majority in the
National Assembly,
he will be a president, but a
president with
few power.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Congratulatory
messages came
from across Europe today.
Russian President Vladimir Putin
offered his,
calling on Macron to -- quote --
"overcome
mutual mistrust."
Members of the European Union
expressed relief.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel
said she was
delighted.
ANGELA MERKEL, German Chancellor
(through
translator): He ran a
courageous, pro-European
campaign.
He stands for openness to the
world.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Boniface says
Macron has
to deal with the fact that 40
percent of the
French electorate are
dissatisfied with the
E.U.
PASCAL BONIFACE: If Macron wants
to succeed,
if he wants to make good
reforms, he must
avoid to have demonstrations in
the streets.
There is a psychological and
political walk
to do to show that Europe is not
only for
the elite, but also for ordinary
people.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But there were
demonstrations
in the streets today.
Activists and union members
protested in Paris
against Macron's proposed labor
reforms.
Some clashed with police, who
made a number
of arrests.
It was a starkly different scene
yesterday,
as Macron supporters sprinted
towards the
Louvre to catch the announcement
of his victory.
France's ethnic minorities, who
feared the
anti-immigrant Le Pen, were
jubilant.
This Macron supporter repeated
"Thank God"
in Arabic.
"Marine Le Pen is a dinosaur,"
this woman
chanted.
WOMAN: In terms of economy,
social cohesion,
everything, I mean, she was bad.
So, we're really happy today.
WOMAN: There is so many people
who didn't
know Emmanuel Macron since one
year, and now
he's the president of the
republic.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Macron's win
was particularly
sweet for the Avaaz
Internet-based advocacy
group which has been campaigning
in Europe
against right-wing nationalists.
Avaaz member Joseph Huff Hannon
points to
the effect of President Trump,
who called
to congratulate Macron this
morning.
JOSEPH HUFF HANNON, Avaaz: The
last 100 days
or so has probably been a pretty
incredible
cautionary tale from what French
people could
come to expect from a faux
populist, somebody
who kind of says, I'm going to
transform the
country and improve your lives,
without offering
any specific policies.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Hannon also
believes Macron's
victory signals that right-wing
nationalism
is on the wane in Europe, and
portends well
for the election later this year
in Germany.
France's new president, a man
with precious
little experience of government,
inherits
a country under a state of
emergency.
Although he has tapped into a
rich seam of
enthusiasm amongst young French
people, his
victory has brought little joy
to much of
the nation.
And he now has to deliver on his
promise to
unite the country.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Paris.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For more on the
election of
Emmanuel Macron, and what his
election represents,
I spoke a short time ago with
the French ambassador
to the United States, Gerard
Araud.
Ambassador Araud, thank you very
much for
joining us.
So, even though we know Mr.
Macron won 66
percent of the vote, we also
know that turnout
was down slightly from before,
that many French
citizens either stayed home or
didn't express
a preference.
Just what is the support for Mr.
Macron right
now?
GERARD ARAUD, French Ambassador
to the United
States: So, we have to
understand that the
situation was totally
unprecedented.
The two main -- the two parties,
the Socialist
on one side, the Conservative
party on the
other side, actually had been
defeated in
the first round of the election,
which means
that, on the second round, you
had basically
Madam Le Pen and Monsieur
Macron, who have
never been elected.
And even for Mr. Macron was
running for the
first time, running for office.
So it means that for some French
electors,
especially electors from the
Socialist Party
or from the Conservative Party,
really, they
felt to be excluded of this
run-off.
And they decided that either
they were going
to stay home or they were going
not to express
a preference.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so how
divided is France
still?
You were telling me, with the
parliamentary
elections coming, it's really
unclear that
Mr. Macron is going to have a
majority.
GERARD ARAUD: Well, we have
never had such
a situation, I guess, in the
French political
life.
You have Mr. Macron, who
basically didn't
have a political party a few
months ago, yet
has created one, who didn't have
any member
of the parliament supporting
him.
And we have the general
elections coming on
June 11 and 18.
So, for him, it will be quite a
challenge
to get a majority in a new
parliament.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, where is
France left then
with the Marine Le Pen brand of
populist nationalism?
Is it gone?
Has it just receded for a short
time?
How do you see that?
GERARD ARAUD: No, actually, we
are facing
the same populist outburst, the
same rebellion
of some of our voters that you
have been facing
during the last presidential
election in the
U.S. or that our British friends
have been
facing during the Brexit
referendum.
And this rebellion is not going
to fade away
if Mr. Macron and his government
are not responding
to the concerns of these voters.
So, in a sense, we have five
years left to
avoid a final victory of
populism.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do these
voters want and
what does it mean for the
European Union?
For now, France stays in the
European Union,
but is that a secure decision,
do you think?
GERARD ARAUD: I think that a lot
of French,
like a lot of American voters,
feel frightened
by globalization.
And, in this country,
globalization, really,
basically is put -- in the eyes
of the voters,
the responsible are Wall Street
or Washington,
D.C.
In Europe, globalization is seen
as the fact
of Brussels, of the European
Union.
So, fighting for -- against
globalization
means for a lot of French
fighting against
the European Union.
So, in a sense, if you reassure
the French
voters about their life in a
global world,
you know, really, I think that
the question
of the European Union will be
solved.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So we know
President Trump
was saying pretty favorable
things about Marine
Le Pen during the campaign, but
he has now
called Mr. Macron to
congratulate him.
How would you describe the
relationship right
now between the U.S. and France
with Mr. Macron's...
(CROSSTALK)
GERARD ARAUD: For the moment,
the relationship
between our two countries is
excellent, for
a simple reason is that, once
more, our soldiers
are fighting together side by
side against
international terrorism in
Africa or in the
Levant against ISIS.
So, I think it's quite
important.
The first time I met Secretary
Mattis, immediately,
he told me: The French are our
best allies.
And I think that is the most
important.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, Mr.
Ambassador, Mr.
Macron had very -- relatively
little to say
during the campaign about
foreign policy,
about his view of the world.
What is known about that?
How does he see France's role?
GERARD ARAUD: Well, first, I
think -- and
that was quite important in our
times of euro
skepticism -- is really a truly
European.
He wants to -- in a sense to
move forward
into European integration.
So, his first visit will be
Berlin, where
he is going to meet Chancellor
Merkel.
And I am quite sure that they
are going to
speak about the next steps in
our European
endeavor.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a visit to
the U.S.?
GERARD ARAUD: Actually, he will
meet President
Trump on the margin of the NATO
summit on
May 25 in a few weeks, because
President Trump
will be in Brussels and they
agreed to have
bilateral meetings in Brussels.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And there is some
reporting
that you may be called to serve
in the Macron
administration.
GERARD ARAUD: My fate is in the
hands of God.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: OK.
Ambassador Gerard Araud, thank
you very much.
GERARD ARAUD: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump's
travel ban
got its first federal appeals
court review
today.
The arguments mark the biggest
test yet for
the president's revised
executive order to
suspend travel to the U.S. for
people from
six majority-Muslim countries.
William Brangham has that story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: At the center
of today's
arguments before the Fourth
Circuit is whether
the president's second executive
order is
motivated by national security
concerns, or
whether it discriminates against
Muslims,
which would be unconstitutional.
Among other issues, the judges
will also decide
whether the president's own
words about Muslims
can be used against him.
Here's an example from a
campaign rally in
December of 2015.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
Donald J. Trump is calling for a
total and
complete shutdown of Muslims
entering the
United States until our
country's representatives
can figure out what the hell is
going on.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: To go through
today's arguments,
I'm joined by Marcia Coyle,
chief Washington
correspondent for "The National
Law Journal,"
and a "NewsHour" regular.
Welcome back.
MARCIA COYLE, "The National Law
Journal":
Thank you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, you heard
what I said
at the introduction.
Is that roughly the contours of
this?
The president is arguing, this
was all about
national security.
His critics are saying, no, it's
religious
discrimination.
MARCIA COYLE: In fact, not just
his critics,
but the lower federal district
court in this
particular case found that the
primary purpose
of the order wasn't national
security, that
was a secondary purpose, that
this was a Muslim
ban and that there was a
violation of the
First Amendment's Establishment
Clause.
So, that is what we -- as we go
into the federal
appellate court here today, the
argument breaks
down in two ways.
The government is still going to
argue that
this is national security, and
it's relying
heavily on a Supreme Court case
from a number
of years back in which the court
said, if
the president has a legitimate
and bona fide
reason for his or her decision
about how to
permit or disallow the entry of
aliens into
this country, that's it, that's
sufficient.
And the government's lawyer said
that there
is a legitimate and bona fide
reason here,
national security, and so,
court, your job
ends basically there.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, let's
listen to one
of these clips.
This is Judge Keenan having a
discussion with
Jeffrey Wall, who is
representing the Trump
administration.
JUDGE BARBARA MILANO KEENAN,
Fourth Circuit
Court of Appeals: What in the
text -- I'm
looking for it.
What in the text of Executive
Order Number
2 supports the conclusion that
these aliens
from these countries, these 82
million people,
would be detrimental to the
interests of the
United States?
JEFFREY WALL, Acting United
States Solicitor
General: I don't think what the
president
was saying was, I know them all
to be dangerous.
He was saying, I'm not certain
here.
What he said is, I find that it
would be detrimental
to letting people from countries
we know to
be dangerous, that have
deteriorated over
time, until I have had a chance,
working with
my Cabinet officials, to assess
the vetting
procedures for those countries.
He said, it would be detrimental
in the face
of that uncertainty.
That is a reasonable finding,
one that an
executive branch official could
draw.
I think there is no question
that it should
survive rational basis review.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, Marcia,
that's the argument
the administration has been
making all along,
that the president has authority
and that
this is in the interest of the
country.
MARCIA COYLE: That's right.
And the government doesn't see
any violation
of the Establishment Clause.
And, of course, as we all know,
the Establishment
Clause doesn't permit the
government to disfavor
religion.
The government's attorney today
said that
there was nothing in this order
that had anything
to do with religion, and that
the president,
even though he had made earlier
statements
about a Muslim ban, had
clarified his position
later after he took the oath of
office to
insist that he's talking about
terrorism and
territories, not religion.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In fact, there
was a very
interesting moment today in the
hearing where
a judge asked, let's just say
the president
had taken back some of those
comments about
Muslims.
Would this be allowable?
Let's listen to that clip.
JUDGE ROBERT KING, Fourth
Circuit Court of
Appeals: The president
repudiated his statements
in campaign and post-election
about the Muslim
ban.
What if he repudiated them all?
OMAR JADWAT, ACLU: I think that
would be significant,
Your Honor.
It would be a significant fact.
I don't know whether...
JUDGE DENNIS SHEDD, Fourth
Circuit Court of
Appeals: Would that change the
result?
OMAR JADWAT: I think a simple
repudiation
might not -- no, wouldn't change
the result.
JUDGE DENNIS SHEDD: Let me
follow up, then.
What if he says he's sorry every
day for a
year?
(LAUGHTER)
JUDGE DENNIS SHEDD: Would that
do it for you?
OMAR JADWAT: Here's the issue,
Your Honor,
is that what the Establishment
Clause prohibits
is targeting and denigrating a
religion.
At a minimum, that's what it
prohibits.
And the question is, would
reasonable people
see what he was doing in total
as achieving
that effect?
JUDGE DENNIS SHEDD: So, you say
reasonable
people would say he doesn't
really mean it
when he says he's sorry?
OMAR JADWAT: Your Honor, I think
it's possible
that saying sorry is not enough.
MARCIA COYLE: This, again, is an
exchange
between judges, but, this time,
with the lawyer
for the challengers to the
order, the ACLU's
lawyer.
And he is saying, basically,
look, you have
to look at the evidence in this
particular
case.
The ACLU believes that this
wasn't a national
security purpose, that this was
a Muslim ban,
and, because of that, a
violation of the Establishment
Clause.
So, the ACLU's lawyer told the
judges, there
are really three categories of
evidence you
should be looking at here.
First, there is the order on its
face.
It's not facially legitimate, he
argued, because,
even though it names just six
countries, there
are other countries that have
been associated
and found to be associated with
terrorism
by the United States that are
not on that
list.
This is just Muslim countries.
Secondly, there are the
president's statements.
And as the ACLU lawyer said,
sometimes, saying
you're sorry is not enough.
These statements, he claims,
continued after
the president took the oath of
office.
So, it's not just campaign
statements.
And then the final category of
evidence, the
lawyer said, had to do with some
reports that
were leaked or released by the
Department
of Homeland Security that
basically said that
the order itself wouldn't
prevent terrorism
in the United States.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: How unusual is
this, Marcia,
to have the president's own
words, the words
of his own administration come
back to be
used as evidence against them in
court?
MARCIA COYLE: Well, I think it's
quite unusual.
And it obviously is an issue of
contention
among the various judges that
have had to
deal with this executive order.
And I think, going forward,
whoever loses
either in this particular case
or in a case
in Hawaii that will be heard in
another week,
and there are many other
challenges pending
around the country, will take
the case to
the Supreme Court.
And there, the Supreme Court
will again have
to deal with the relevance and
weight of the
president's statements.
Ultimately, I think it will be
the Supreme
Court that will have to resolve
this tension.
Is this just to be judged on the
basis of
national security, or does the
religion clause
jurisprudence come in as well?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Marcia Coyle,
as always,
thank you so much.
MARCIA COYLE: My pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: When you go to
the doctor,
you often leave with a
prescription for medicine,
but some doctors are
experimenting with a
new kind of prescription, one
for fresh, healthy
food.
And, as the trend grows, more
doctors and
health professionals are getting
more training
in the kitchen.
Special correspondent Allison
Aubrey of NPR
News has the story.
WOMAN: We have the minerals and
grains that
are going to lower blood
pressure.
ALLISON AUBREY: At Casey Health
Institute
in Gaithersburg, Maryland, the
doctor is in,
but your appointment might just
be in the
kitchen.
This is called the Physician's
Kitchen.
And on this night, primary care
doctor Nicole
Farmer is prescribing food.
DR.
NICOLE FARMER, Primary Care
Physician: So,
you can see eating whole grains
actually is
going full circle in terms of
helping to control
diabetes and blood pressure, but
also prevent
it too.
ALLISON AUBREY: This doesn't
mean giving up
favorites, like pancakes.
Instead, the goal here is to
make breakfast
foods healthier, using grains
like buckwheat
and millet.
DR.
NICOLE FARMER: I feel like it's
important
for me to spend my time here, in
addition
to being in the exam room.
If I teach you how to cook,
you're going to
improve the types of food that
you eat, and
then ultimately that is what is
going to prevent
chronic disease for you.
ALLISON AUBREY: The most recent
evidence comes
from a study published in "The
Journal of
the American Medical
Association."
Researchers found that, here in
the United
States, about one out of every
two deaths
from heart disease, stroke and
type 2 diabetes
is linked to a poor diet.
That's 1,000 deaths every day.
Paula Fischthal knows that all
too well.
Her dad died early of a heart
attack, and
her mom had diabetes.
With this strong family history,
she was really
concerned.
That's how she ended up here.
PAULA FISCHTHAL, Patient: When I
first came
here, Dr. Farmer diagnosed me
with pre-diabetes.
And I really didn't want to take
medication.
ALLISON AUBREY: Fischthal has
changed her
whole relationship with food.
She tossed out processed snacks,
and she's
cooking with fresh ingredients.
PAULA FISCHTHAL: I have
gradually gotten rid
of the starch that goes with
dinner.
It's more vegetables and
protein.
ALLISON AUBREY: She also started
taking yoga
classes.
And over the last year, she's
lost weight.
Now her blood sugar has returned
to normal.
And this means she's no longer
considered
to have pre-diabetes.
Her story fits with the
conclusion of the
most comprehensive study ever on
diabetes
prevention.
It was a federally funded study
carried out
by the National Institutes of
Health, with
collaborators at 27 sites across
the country.
They found, when people change
their diet
to lose weight and become more
active, it
can be more effective than
medication in preventing
the disease.
Dr. Farmer tells all her
patients about it.
DR.
NICOLE FARMER: The diabetes
prevention study
taught medical science that we
don't need
to jump the gun when it comes to
prescribing
medications to prevent diabetes,
and that
the most effective thing we can
do is to promote
a healthier diet and to promote
them to engage
in regular exercise.
The porridge could be a daytime
snack, if
you want it to.
ALLISON AUBREY: And meeting
patients here
in the kitchen, Farmer says, is
the best promotion.
The idea that you can bring
doctors and other
health care professionals into
the kitchen
to teach people that changing
their diets
can actually help them prevent
disease is
starting to catch on.
Inside this stone fortress is
the Culinary
Institute of America's Napa
Valley campus.
Here, some 500 doctors and
health professionals
recently got a crash course in
how to build
food and nutrition into their
medical practices.
They spent four days sauteeing,
slicing and
tasting.
It's put on by the Harvard
School of Public
Health and the Culinary
Institute, as well
as a few dozen food service
companies who
sponsor the event.
DR.
DAVID EISENBERG, Harvard School
of Public
Health: -At this conference, we
bring in some
of the top nutrition scientists
in the world
to say, look, here's the
evidence that eating
these foods either keeps you
healthy or reduces
your risk of disease, whereas
eating these
foods really speeds up your risk
of disease,
heart disease, cancer, diabetes.
Second,the chefs at the Culinary
Institute,
who are not just great chefs,
but great teachers,
say, let me show you how to do
that.
ALLISON AUBREY: Dr. David
Eisenberg from Harvard's
School of Public Health is
master of ceremonies
and founder of this event.
It's called Healthy Kitchens,
Healthy Lives.
One thing he's trying to change
may be surprising.
Most doctors, he says, aren't
taught much
at all about nutrition.
DR.
DAVID EISENBERG: Today, most
medical schools
in the United States teach less
than 25 hours
of nutrition over four years.
The fact that less than 20
percent of medical
schools have a single required
course in nutrition,
it's a scandal.
It's outrageous.
It's obscene.
ALLISON AUBREY: Primary care
doctor Helen
Delichatsios is speaking at the
event.
She's been teaching her patients
about nutrition
and cooking for seven years now,
at Massachusetts
general hospital in Boston.
DR.
HELEN DELICHATSIOS, Primary Care
Physician:
Many people come to their doctor
and have
high blood pressure and high
cholesterol.
One somewhat easy answer is to
send them away
with one prescription for their
blood pressure,
one prescription for their
diabetes, one prescription
for their cholesterol, when, in
reality, if
you work on the underlying root
problem, which
may be poor diet and physical
inactivity,
both of which are tied together,
fixing those
can address all of the concerns
at once.
ALLISON AUBREY: Delichatsios has
figured out
how her practice can get
reimbursed for all
the cooking and nutrition
instruction.
And she's sharing this
information with other
doctors at the conference.
Dr. Joseph Wetterhahn's hospital
just installed
a teaching kitchen.
He's a primary care doctor in a
rural area
of Upstate New York.
DR.
JOSEPH WETTERHAHN, Primary Care
Physician:
Part of our education here is,
they do teach
how to do the correct coding and
the correct
billing, so that you can do this
at a break-even.
ALLISON AUBREY: After attending
this conference
a few years back, Sanjeet
Baidwan was so inspired,
she convinced Yale Medical
School to let her
teach a new class called
Culinary Medicine.
She's a primary care doctor at
Yale's Medical
Center in New Haven,
Connecticut.
DR.
SANJEET BAIDWAN, Yale Medical
Center: When
dealing with medical school, I
often felt
that residents were
ill-equipped, or they
would say to me, well, I don't
know that.
Maybe we should send them to a
nutritionist,
or would kind of maybe give some
really broad-stroke
nutrition information like off
the cuff.
But I would say that a lot of
patients come
in just really desperate for
good information,
good direction.
ALLISON AUBREY: Eisenberg's
vision goes way
beyond just doctors in the
office.
DR.
DAVID EISENBERG: If we're going
to build teaching
kitchens in hospitals, maybe we
should also
think about building them in
K-12 schools,
and why stop there?
How about corporate workplaces
and retirement
communities?
ALLISON AUBREY: One of the
largest food service
companies in the world is
already on board.
Compass Group USA Runs food
services at schools,
nursing homes and corporate
offices.
They're planning to build 20
teaching kitchens
this year.
DR.
NICOLE FARMER: We have the
polyphenols in
grains that are going to lower
pressure.
ALLISON AUBREY: Back in
Gaithersburg, Maryland,
physician Nicole Farmer says one
stumbling
block for her patients can be
cost.
But she shows them that healthy
choices aren't
necessarily more expensive.
DR.
NICOLE FARMER: We got a whole
bag of millet
for less than $2.
And this contains about three to
four servings,
so about enough for three to
four meals.
ALLISON AUBREY: So, what about
this farro
here?
This is a little bit pricier
than a brown
rice, right?
DR.
NICOLE FARMER: So, a box of
farro will cost
about the same price as a
good-quality brown
Rice.
ALLISON AUBREY: Farmer says you
may have to
shop around a little bit or go
online to buy
these grains, but they are
available, including
in stores that accept SNAP
benefits, or food
stamps.
Over the last decade, Eisenberg
says he has
watched as this movement has
started to take
off.
DR.
DAVID EISENBERG: There are now
hundreds of
teaching kitchens.
And I think the idea has found
receptivity
across the country.
We have now got Cleveland
Clinic.
We have got Kaiser Permanente.
We have got Harvard, and
Princeton, and the
University of Texas, and 20
other university
systems making this available to
their patients
or their trainees.
ALLISON AUBREY: I'm Allison
Aubrey of NPR
News for the "PBS NewsHour" in
Napa Valley,
California.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Online, if you're
looking for
healthy recipes approved by both
chefs and
doctors, we have some for you to
try.
You can find five ideas at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Finally tonight, our Politics
Monday duo is
here to unpack the aftermath of
the Republican
health care plan passing the
House, new concerns
about possible conflicts of
interest in the
Trump White House, and former
President Obama
speaking out about his signature
legislation.
For all that, Tamara Keith of
NPR and Amy
Walter of The Cook Political
Report.
And welcome to both of you.
And before we talk about that,
we are just
literally in the last minute or
two watching
some new tweets from President
Trump.
Amy, he is essentially saying
that today's
hearing on Capitol Hill about
the Russia investigation,
what the White House was told by
the then
acting attorney general, he's
saying it's
all old news, that the fake news
had to have
been disappointed.
He is calling the entire
investigation a hoax.
He said, when will this
taxpayer-funded charade
end?
I guess it's not surprising.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: It's
not surprising.
And the short answer for when it
will end
is not very -- not very soon,
not anytime
soon.
In fact, it's more likely that
we are talking
about these issues well into
2018.
And that is the reality of how
much staff
that the House and the Senate
still have to
get to that they haven't even
begun.
The Sally Yates story today
didn't produce
any bombshells, but that doesn't
mean that
this is now going to go away in
the near future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, indeed, Tam,
the gentleman
I interviewed just a few minutes
ago, former
assistant attorney general, was
saying it's
pretty clear now the Russians
are going to
be -- they not only felt they
were successful
this time.
They are going to keep trying in
2020.
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Yes.
And that is why -- that sort of
concern is
why members of Congress are
going to keep
investigating this, whether
President Trump
wants them to or not.
President Trump often takes
these sorts of
investigations or hearings as
coming after
him, where many members of
Congress see this
as going for information, and
not necessarily
trying to undermine him, but, of
course, the
resistance does see it as a
chance to undermine
him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, let's go back
and talk
about -- it seems like a hundred
years ago,
Amy, that the House of
Representatives voted
to -- finally voted to undo, at
least to pass
a replacement bill for
Obamacare.
There's already been ads run in
congressional
districts around the country
both for and
against Republican members,
depending on how
they voted.
Is this -- do we know yet
whether this is
a plus or minus politically for
these House
members?
AMY WALTER: Yes, if you're
sitting in one
of these competitive
congressional districts,
you might think that we're
already deep into
the middle of a midterm
election, the number
of ads that are running now and
will continue
to run.
Democrats believe that this is a
potent issue
for them in the election.
And they remember what it was
like when they
were on the other side.
That's the reason they think
it's going to
be so powerful.
Back in 2010, when they were the
ones voting
for a bill that was
controversial, pushing
it through on a party-line-only
vote, they
suffered the consequences.
It was a toxic vote for them.
They lost 63 seats and control
of the House.
Democrats are convinced this is
going to be
that kind of issue for
Republicans.
There is not a lot of polling
that's been
out yet.
One poll that came out today
showed 31 percent
of Americans supporting it.
Compare that to where Americans
-- how Americans
feel about the Obamacare, which
is now at
about 48 percent.
So that's not great.
The best news for Republicans is
that Republicans
are supportive of it, about 75
percent supportive
of it, but the intensity on the
other side,
people who say they oppose is
much, much higher.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's growing.
And, of course, we are months
away from the
midterms.
It's November of next year, Tam,
and you still
don't know what the Senate is
going to do.
TAMARA KEITH: That's right.
The Senate is going to take
their time.
They are waiting for the
Congressional Budget
Office to come back with a score
of the House
bill.
That's something that the House
didn't wait
for.
They're also saying that they're
basically
starting fresh and doing
something on their
own.
There is a deadline here.
The way they're trying to do
this is through
this budget reconciliation
process.
That's why they don't need any
Democratic
votes in the Senate, but that
turns into a
pumpkin at the end of September.
So, there isn't much time.
And there is a big challenge
here.
On the House side, they really
thread a needle
to get the number of votes that
they needed,
to get the Freedom Caucus and
the moderates
to come along.
The needle is completely
different over on
the Senate side that they need
to thread.
And how they combine those
things, if the
Senate is able to get something
done, with
a much tighter margin than they
had in the
House, it's unclear.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It is a somewhat
different
calculus in the Senate.
AMY WALTER: It is a different --
absolutely.
And the other thing to remember,
if you're
thinking as a House member, is,
no matter
what happens with the Senate
bill, no matter
whether we ultimately see it on
the president's
desk and it's signed into law
and it looks
different from the one that way
voted on,
they own that vote that they
cast the other
week and all that went along
with it.
And that's why, when we talked
about these
ads as a preview for 2018, for
those people
sitting in those districts, what
they are
watching are images of a baby
with a respirator,
a pregnant woman who's looking
distraught
talk about the fact that there
are costs that
are going to go up, seniors are
going to pay
more, preexisting conditions are
going to
exist.
Those kinds of ads are going to
run throughout
2018, regardless of what the
final bill looks
like.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Something
completely separate
I want to ask you both about.
And you have been doing some
reporting on
this, Tam.
The president's son-in-law,
Jared Kushner,
he has separated himself from
the business
that his family very involved
in, very successful
real estate business.
His sister was in China over the
last few
days, and talking about special
treatment
possibly for people seeking
these so-called
EB-5 visas.
It's complicated, but it matters
in terms
of people looking at whether
there is any
conflict of interests here.
TAMARA KEITH: That's right.
And the Kushner organization has
apologized
for any misunderstanding or any
impression
that could be left that she was
trying to
use her brother's position.
Jared Kushner has said that he
will not involve
himself in anything involving
these visas
as they're considered.
This is a controversial visa
program.
For as little as $500,000,
investors, foreign
nationals can invest in a
project, a real
estate project typically, and
get a visa that
gets them on a path to
citizenship to become
a citizen of the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's --
we're -- only
a little bit of time left here,
but it's just
another case of what the Trump
White House
has to be on the lookout for.
AMY WALTER: Yes, right.
And here's an opportunity.
It's a president who wants to
push for immigration
reform.
He could have talked about
reforming this
very issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Politics Monday.
Amy, Tam, thank you both.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.